#Segmentation of Vestibular Schwannoma from Magnetic Resonance Imaging: An Open Annotated Dataset and Baseline Algorithm (Vestibular-Schwannoma-SEG)

This collection contains a labeled dataset of MRI images collected on 242 consecutive patients with vestibular schwannoma (VS) undergoing Gamma Knife stereotactic radiosurgery (GK SRS). The structural images included contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (ceT1) images and high-resolution T2-weighted (hrT2) images. Each imaging dataset is accompanied by the patient’s radiation therapy (RT) dataset including the RTDose, RTStructures and RTPlan. Additionally, registration matrices (.tfm format) and segmentation contour lines (JSON format) are provided. All structures were manually segmented in consensus by the treating neurosurgeon and physicist using both the ceT1 and hrT2 images. The value of this collection is to provide clinical image data including fully annotated tumour segmentations to facilitate the development and validation of automated segmentation frameworks. It may also be used for research relating to radiation treatment. 

Registration matrices and JSON contours 

Registration Matrices: For each subject and each modality there is a text file named sub-<case>-inv_T1_LPS_to_T2_LPS.tfm or sub-<case>-inv_T2_LPS_to_T1_LPS.tfm. The files specify affine transformation matrices that can be used to co-register the T1 image to the T2 image and vice versa. The file format is a standard format defined by the Insight Toolkit (ITK) library. The matrices are the result of the co-registration of fiducials of the Leksell Stereotactic System MR Indicator box into which the patient’s head is fixed during image acquisition. The localization of fiducials and co-registration was performed automatically by the LeksellGammaPlan software.

Contours: For each subject and each modality there is a text file named contours.json. These contour files in the T1 and T2 folder contain the contour points of the segmented structures in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format, mapped in the coordinate frames of the T1 image and the T2 image, respectively. There can be small differences between the contour points of the RTSTRUCT and the contour points of the JSON files as explained in the following: In most cases, the tumour was segmented on the T1 image while the cochlea was typically segmented on the T2 image. This meant that some contour lines (typically for the tumour) were coplanar with the slices of the T1 image while others (typically for the cochlea) were coplanar with T2 slices. After co-registration, the (un-resampled) slices of the T1 and T2 image generally did not coincide; for example, due to different image position and, occasionally, slice thickness. Therefore, the combined co-registered contour lines were neither jointly coplanar with the T1 nor with the T2 image slices. Upon export of the segmentations in a given target space, the LeksellGammaPlan software interpolates between the original contour lines to create new slice-aligned contour lines in the target image space (T1 or T2). This results in the interpolated slice-aligned contour lines found in the RTSTRUCTs. In contrast, the contours in the JSON files were not interpolated after co-registration, and therefore describe the original (potentially off-target-space-slice) manual segmentation accurately.